# 🖥 EC2 
## Create instance

1. Go to EC2 Console - https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/
2. Go to Instances
3. Click `Launch Instance`
4. Select an `Amazon Linux 2` Amazon Machine Image (AMI) - OS + SW that will be launched on the server
5. Select `t2.micro` instance type - Select CPUs, Memory, etc for your server
6. On Configre Instance Details we can customize our parameters:
    - Number of instances
        - Default: 1
    - Purchasing option 
        - Request Spot instances 
        - Default: On-demand instances
    - Network
        - Comes with the default vpc selected
    - Subnet
        - Here we can select the AZ
    - Auto-assign public IP
        - Default: Use subnet setting (Enabled)
    - Placement group
    - Capacity reservation
    - IAM role
    - Shutdown behaviour
        - Default - Stop
        - Terminate
    - Stop - Hibernate behaviour
    - Enable termination protection
    - Monitoring
        - Enable CloudWatch
    - Tenancy
        - Shared
        - Dedicated
        - Dedicated host
    - Add Elastic Inference acceletator
    - T2 / T3 Unlimited
    - File systems
    - Advanced:
        - Metadata accessible
        - Metadata version
        - Metadata token response hop limit
        - User data

7. Add Storage
   - Root Storage: The OS of the server is on a disc called Storage.
        - Size 8 GiB
        - Type gp2 - General purpose SSD
        - Delete on termination
        - Not Encrypted
   - EC2 Storages are EBS Volume 

8. Tags
    - Add `Name` tag with key value `ec2-first-instance`

9. Configure Security Group
    - This is basically a firewall around the instance
    - Create a new security group with name `ec2-first-sg`
    - Allow access to instance from SSH
        - Type SHH / TCP Protocol, Port 22, Source 0.0.0.0/0

10. Review and Launch
11. Create a key-pair `ec2-tutorial` to access our instance and save it
12. Launch


----

## SSH into EC2

1. Download .pem file
2. Get the Public DNS name for the EC2 we want to access
3. In mac, have ssh setup

4. From terminal

```shell script
ssh -i "ec2-tutorial.pem" ec2-user@ec2-54-198-188-159.compute-1.amazonaws.com
```

> Exam question:

When we first download a Private Key file we get the error:
WARNING: UNPROTECTED PRIVATE KEY FILE!
Permissions 0644 for ‘*.pem’ are too open.
It is required that your private key files are NOT accessible by others.
This private Key will be ignored.
Load key error: bad permissions

- private key can leak

To fix this:
```shell script
  Chmod 0400 *.pem
```

Now we can access our EC2 instance

```

       __|  __|_  )
       _|  (     /   Amazon Linux 2 AMI
      ___|\___|___|

https://aws.amazon.com/amazon-linux-2/
7 package(s) needed for security, out of 14 available
Run "sudo yum update" to apply all updates.

[ec2-user@ip-172-31-47-136 ~]$ 
```


To logout use command `exit`

---

## Elastic IPS

When we restart a EC2 instance, the Private IP stays the same, but the Public IP changes.
One way (not recommended) to make sure to keep the Public IP, is to create an Elastic IP and assign it to the EC2 instance.

1. Go to EC2 Console, under Network & Security - Elastic IPS - https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/v2/home?region=us-east-1#Addresses:
2. Click on `Allocate Elastic IP Address`
3. We can choose between:
    - Using an IPv4 address in Amazon's pool (Choose this one)
    - Or use IPv4 address that you already own from outside Amazon
4. `Allocate`, and now we have an Elastic IP Address that we need to assign to a EC2 instance.
5. Click on `Action` and `Associate Elastic IP Address`
6. Resource type `Instance`, and select the EC2 instance that we created.

Now when we go back to the EC2 Instances console, we can see under the created EC2 instance that the IPv4 Public IP is the same as the Elastic IP address associated to this instance.

If we restart our EC2 instance, the Public IP will stay the same. 
We can even see the Public IP when the EC2 instance is stopped.

1. To release the Elastic IP, we need to select the EC2 instance,
2.  `Actions` / `Networking` / `Dissociate Elastic IP Address`
3. `Yes, Dissociate`


Elastic IPs are charged when not associated to an instance, so make sure to delete it.
- Go to Actions / `Release Elastic IP`

---

## Install Apache Web Server

- We’ll install an Apache Web Server to display a web page
- We’ll create an index.html that shows the hostname of our machine

1. Make sure your EC2 instance is started
2. Get the Public IP: 54.81.99.120
3. SSH into the instance
4. Inside the machine:
    1. Run the following command to enter root mode, and update system packages.
    ```shell script
       sudo su
       yum update -y
    ```
   2. Install and start http as a service, and make sure it starts on reboots
   ```shell script
       yum install http.x86_64 -y
       systemctl start httpd.service
       systemctl enable httpd.service
    ```
   3. Run `curl localhost:80` and we will see the home page
5. Go back to our local machine, and try to access 80 port on the Public IP of the EC2 from the browser.
    > We get a timeout because we need to set up the SG to allow us access to the instance from port 80.
6. Go to the Security Group associated to our EC2 instance,
    1. Actions, `Edit inbound rules`
    2. Under the SSH rule we already have, Add a new rule
    3. Select Type `HTTP`, Source type `Anywhere` and save
7. Reload 54.81.99.120:80 (PublicIP:80) on the browser, and you will see Apache's launch page.

"_This page is used to test the proper operation of the Apache HTTP server after it has been installed. If you can read this page, it means that the Apache HTTP server installed at this site is working properly._"


Let's change the home page.

1. Go back to the EC2 instance machine.
2. Run `echo "Hello World" > /var/www/html/index.html`
3. Now if we reload our page from the browser, we should get _Hello World_
4. Run `echo "Hello World from $(hostname -f)" > /var/www/html/index.html`
5. Now from the browser we will see: _Hello World from ip-172-31-47-136.ec2.internal_


> ip-172-31-47-136.ec2.internal is the internal DNS of our EC2 machine

---

## User data

It is possible to bootstrap our instances using an EC2 User data script.
Used to automate boot tasks such as:
• Installing updates
• Installing software
• Downloading common files from the internet

We will create a User data script to create our Apache Web server on first boot, with the basic landing page we created previously.

1. Terminate previously created EC2 instance
2. Launch a new instance with the same configuration and steps used on the first section of this document
3. Under Advanced settings, in `user data` use the following script

    ```shell script
    #!/bin/bash
    yum update -y
    yum install -y httpd.x86_64
    systemctl start httpd.service
    systemctl enable httpd.service
    echo "Hello World from $(hostname -f)" > /var/www/html/index.html
    ``` 

4. Leave everything else as is.
5. Choose Security Group we created for our previous instance.
6. Use the key-pair we created previously as well.

---
## Instance Launch Types

- **On-demand instances:**, we need to follow the steps we described above.
    - EC2 Dashboard
        - Instances
            - Launch new instance

- **Reserved instances:** For instances we want to reserve in time
    - EC2 Dashboard
        - Reserved Instances
            - `Purchase Reserved Instances`
    
    - We can search available instances by:
        - Platform (OS): Linux/Unix, etc
        - Instance type: t2.micro, etc
        - Tenancy: Default, dedicated
        - Term: 1-12 months, 12-36 months
        - Offering class: Any, standard, convertible
        - Payment: No Upfront, Partial Upfront, All Upfront 
    - We can select the number of instances we want, add to cart, and buy
     
- **Scheduled Instances**: Scheduled Instances allow you to reserve Amazon EC2 instances on a recurring schedule. 
    You can purchase daily, weekly, or monthly reservations to ensure your applications have the compute capacity you need, when you need it.
    
    - EC2 Dashboard
        - Scheduled Instances
            - `Purchase Reserved Instances`

    - We can buy selecting:
        - Schedule
            - Starting on (date)
            - For duration (hours)
            - Recurring (daily, weekly, monthly)
        - Instance details
            - Instance type
            - Platform
            - AZ

- **Dedicated Host**: Dedicated Hosts allow you to provision EC2 instances on physical servers fully dedicated for your use.
    - EC2 Dashboard
        - Dedicated Hosts
            - `Allocate dedicated host`
    
    - We need to choose:
        - Instance family: a1, c3, c4, c5, c5d, c6g, d2, g2, g3, etc
        - Support multiple instance types (checkbox)
        - Instance type (if prev. option was not selected)
        - AZ
        - Instance auto-placement (checkbox)
        - Host recovery (checkbox)
        - Quantity
        - CLI commands

- **Spot Requests**: This is for Spot fleets
    - EC2 Dashboard
        - Spot Requests
            - `Request Spot instances`   
    
    - Before we request spot instances, we can check previous prices in `Pricing history`
    
    - We can requets our spot instances based on our workload needs. The options are:
        - Load balancing workloads: Instances of the same size, in any AZ, good for web services
        - Bog data workloads: Instances of any size, in a single AZ, good for Map Reduce jobs
        - Flexible workloads: any size, any AZ, good for batch and CI/CD jobs
        - Defined duration workloads: launch instances in a spot block for 1-6 hours.
    
    - Besides, we need to define:
        - Launch template - instance launch parameters
        - AMI
        - Minimum compute unit
        - Network
        - AZ
        - Key-pair
        - Other:
            - EBS Volumes and optimizations
            - Monitoring
            - Tenancy
            - Security group
            - IP settings
            - IAM profile
            - User data
        - Capacity needed
            - Total Instances
            - On-demand portion
            - Maintain target capacity
            - Maintain target cost for Spot
        - Fleet request
        - Maximum price
        - Request valid from / until
            - Terminate instances when request expires
        - Load balancing
    
- **Spot instance:**: if we only want 1 single spot instance
    - EC2 Dashboard
        - Instances
            - Launch new instance
            
    - We follow the same steps as for on-demand instances
        - On Instance details (step 3) we select Purchasing option: `Request Spot instances`
        - We will be shown a list of current spot instances prices
        - Maximum price we are willing to pay
        - Persistent request (checkbox)
        - Request valid to (date)

- **Dedicated instance:**: Same as for on-demand instance
    - EC2 Dashboard
        - Instances
            - Launch new instance
    
    - On Instance details (step 3) we select Tenancy, and we can select between:
        - Shared hardware (default)
        - Dedicated host
        - Dedicated instance
    
    - Next can select Placement affinity options
        
---

## EC2 AMI

We can create an AMI from a current server. We will be charged only by the spaced used in S3 where it will be stored.

1. To create an AMI, we will select the EC2 we want to make the image of.
2. Actions / Image / `Create Image`
3. We need to give it an image name, description, volumes

4. We can check the customs AMIs we created on EC2 / AMI
5. From here we can do a lot of different things with our images:
    - Launch
    - Spot request
    - Deregister
    - Register New AMI
    - Copy AMI -  we can copy it over to a different region
    - Modify AMI Permissions - Here we can make our image public, or shared it with other AWS accounts
    - Modify boot volume setting

6. If we want to launch a new instance based of our AMI we will see in Storage, that the Root Volume cames from the snapshot that the AMI created from the original EC2 root volume.
7. We the new instance is ready and running, we can see that all the configurations and installations from the first EC2 were automatically done in the second instance.

---

## Placement Group

1. Go to EC2 Console / Placement Group
2. `Create Placement Group`
3. Define a Name and a Strategy
    - Cluster
    - Spread
    - Partition
    
4. We will create 3 Placement groups:
    - `high-performance-application` of type `Cluster`
    - `critical-application` of type `Spread`
    - `distributed-application` of type `Partition`

5. To use them, we need to launch a new EC2 instance
6. On the `Configure Instance Details` we have the option `Placement group` where we can select the group we want.

---

## Elastic Network Interface (ENI)

ENI is a logical component in a VPC, and represents virtual network cards. 

1. Let's create 2 EC2 instances 
2. Place both of them in the same AZ
3. When we look at the details of one of the instances, we will see they have assigned:
    - A Public IPv4 IP
    - A Private IPv4 IP
    - A Network Interface eth0: This representes an interface ID (ENI)
4. Go to EC2 / `Network Interfaces`
5. Here we will see the two ENI created for each of the EC2, and all the details
6. We can create a secondary ENI by clicking on `Create Network Interface`
    - Choose Description, 
    - Subnet, it must be in the same AZ that your instances
    - We can attach Security Groups
7. Right click on the Secondary ENI, and select `Attach Network Interface`
    - Select the EC2 instance to which you wish to attach the ENI to
8. We will see this ENI will have status changed to `in-use`
9. Going back to the EC2 instances, we can see that one of the EC2 has 3 Network Interfaces: `eth0` and `eth1`
10. We can go back to the Secondary ENI, and select `Detach`, and now we can rettach it to another EC2
11. When we are ready we can Detach the Secondary ENI, and Delete it. Also remember to terminate the EC2 instances.

---

## Hibernate

This feature is only supported (in this moment) in Linux, Amazon Linux and Windows AMI, for instance types r, m, c.

1. Let's create a new EC2 instance
2. Select AMI `Amazon Linux 2`
3. Select Instance type `m4.large`
4. In the Instance Details, under shutdown behavior we will see an option:
    - `Stop - Hibernate` - Enable Hibernate as an additional stop behavior
    - To enable this feature we need to have enough space in our EBS volume to accommodate a RAM dump, and the volume must be encrypted.
5. In the Storage option, we need to Encrypt the volume, and add enough size to it.